'''Altered Format TIM'''

The .TIM files used for battle model textures differ from the classic format, preventing 
tools like ~TIMViewer and ~PSicture from detecting them. Like the [[tim|Classic TIM]], the altered 
format ~TIMs consist of a HEADER, CLUT, and IMAGE data -- only the headers for each element 
are different. Thus it is possible to run a bitmap through ~TIMViewer and turn it into a 
classic TIM, then take the "meat" of the CLUT and IMAGE data from that classic TIM and 
insert it around the "skeleton" of an existing altered format TIM's headers. The resulting 
chimera TIM is usable by the game for battle models. This method was used successfully in 
the Compendium's Chrono Cross Magil/Janus/Magus Patch project.

'''HEADER'''
 Length is dec(4+#O*4) bytes long

 #O #O #O #O O1 O1 O1 O1 - O2 O2 O2 O2 ...

 Where...
 #O = Number of Objects in the file. The first object is the CLUT; all 
      subsequent objects are texture ~IMAGEs.
 O1 = Pointer to the first Object - the CLUT.
 O2 = Pointer to the second Object - a texture IMAGE.

'''CLUT'''

 ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? - ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? 
 RG BS RG BS...

 Where...
  *?? appear to express all the information contained in a classic TIM CLUT header, but with  
   an additional 8 bytes of unknown function interspersed. 
  *RG BS are the red, green, blue, and special transparency values for each color in the CLUT.
   Note that these byte pairs are read as their constituent bits, so one nybble (half-byte)   
   doesn't necessarily correspond to each color specification; one letter is used to represent 
   each nybble for ease of labeling.

For quick reference, the RG BS CLUT data in an Altered Format TIM typically occurs between 
addresses 0x1C and 0x21C.


'''IMAGE'''

 ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ?? - ?? ?? ?? ?? HW HW HH HH
 I1 I2 I3 I4 .. ..

  Where...
  HW = "Half Width"; literally half the value of the image width. If the image 
       is 128 pixels wide, for example, it's reported here as 0x40.
  HH = Height. Curiously, unlike the width, the image height is reported 
       literally. If the image is 128 pixels high, for example, it's reported
       here as 0x80.
  I# = Offsets into the CLUT. One byte (8 bits) is required for each pixel 
       because the TIM header specifies 8 bits-per-pixel.

For quick reference, the I# image data in an Altered Format TIM usually follows address 0x22C.

[[Chrono Cross|Back to Chrono Cross Index]]
