'''1. Introduction'''

Like many other games, Chrono Cross just loves to compact disparate types of data
into single files of a proprietary design. To be exact, CC has at least three separate
types of "data lump" files, each with a different internal schema:

-The drp file, which begins with the ASCII letters "drp" and almost always contains
visual or audio resources. The more I see of these, the more I think that Magil was
correct in his speculation that the letters stand for "Dynamic Resource Pack".

-The tbt file, used only for text

-The cpt file, which is used for everything else (or in some cases, wherever the Squeenix
dev team decided they wanted to)

What I'm going to talk about here is the drp filetype, which probably has the most complex
internal structure.

'''2. Structure of a drp'''

A drp file contains a 12-byte header, a series of internal file pointers, and then a glob
of files, each with its own individual 12-byte header. Here's a typical drp overall file header:

64 72 70 00 00 00 00 00 xx yy 00 00

The first three bytes spell out "drp" in ASCII. The other two non-zero bytes indicate the
number of entries in the file, although unfortunately, not in an entirely straightforward
manner (even when endianness is taken into consideration)&mdash;to get the number, perform the
calculation yyxx / 64. We'll call this number ''num'' from now on.

After the header, the drp will provide ''num'' pointers to the beginnings of the files
inside the lump. These pointers are 4 bytes each, little-endian (that is, with the byte
order reversed from what the naive viewer will expect), and indicate an offset based on
the beginning of the file. There is no end-of-file pointer.

Each subfile in the lump has a 12-byte header of its own. Here's a typical one:

00 00 00 00 nn aa mm ee tt xx yy zz

The bytes nn aa mm ee give a four-letter ASCII version of what appears to be the name
of the file. If the chosen name is less than four characters long, it will be padded
with 00 bytes. Filenames contain numbers, lower-case letters, and the following symbols:
_-+></=! As I found out the hard way, some of these are not legal filename characters on
all file systems.

tt is the file type indicator, of which more later.

xx yy zz are a little-endian equal to 16 times the length of the file.

The data for the file begins immediately after the end of the header and runs until the
header for the next file in the lump (that is, the address pointed to by the next pointer),
or to the end of the drp if it is the last file.

'''3. File type indicators'''

The type of each file inside a drp lump is indicated by a single-byte code. There appear to
be only 15-16 codes actually in use; nine have been connected to an actual file type.
''Single-byte file codes in drps''

{|class="wikitable"
|<B>hex</B>
|<B>dec</B>
|<B>ext</B>
|<B>info</B>
|<B>found in</B>
|-
|01
|1
|[[Chrono Cross .drp File Format Notes|drp]]
|nested drp file
|any
|-
|02
|2
|[[Chrono Cross mesh File Format Notes|mesh]]
|generic mesh
|any except battle anims
|-
|03
|3
|[[Chrono Cross timinfo File Format Notes|timinfo]]
|information about slicing, mirroring, etc., in tim textures
|any except battle anims
|-
|04
|4
|[[Standard .tim Format Notes|tim]]
|tim texture|any except battle anims
|-
|05
|5
|[[Chrono Cross Music .minst Format Notes|minst]]
|music instruments
|any except rooms
|-
|07
|7
|unknown [1]
|
|0018, 1967
|-
|0A
|10
|unknown[2]
|
|any
|-
|0B
|11
|[[Chrono Cross Model Format Notes|mdl]]
|model pack
|rooms and elements
|-
|0C
|12
|unknown[2]
|
|any
|-
|10
|16
|unknown[3]
|
|any
|-
|12
|18
|unknown
|
|rooms
|-
|15
|21
|
|model for lens light effects?
|-
|16
|22
|[[Chrono Cross Music .mseq Format Notes|mseq]]
|music sequence
|any except rooms
|-
|19
|25
|[[Chrono Cross Animations Format|anim]]
|model animation (cpt pack)
|battle animations, elements
|-
|1A
|26
|unknown[4]
|
|battle animations, elements
|-
|25
|37
|[[Chrono Cross LZSS Compression Notes|lzss]]
|LZSS compressed data
|2416
|}

One of these has GOT to be the .atim texture type&mdash;10, 12 and 16 are probably the
leading candidates&mdash;but I don't know which. Likewise, I would expect another of
those types to correspond to the .cpt lump type.

[1]Type 7 is potentially a problem. It's used only a handful of times, but in an
entirely inconsistent manner: two files marked as type 7 are recognizably tbt lumps,
one is a TIM texture (despite ~TIMs having their own code) and the other 16 are
inscrutable&mdash;one may be an executable. So the only way to tell what's actually in
a type 7 file is to open it and check.

[2]Probably relates to graphics somehow.

[3]May relate to meshes.

[4]Associated with things that cause damage, e.g. attack animations, offensive Elements.

[[Chrono Cross|Back to Chrono Cross Index]]
