Similar to weapon models.

They all have a header that starts with '01 00 00 80', a group of faces and a vertex buffer.
There're no bones/transforms, so they are just generic mesh type (a weapon model is mesh itself).

They are pretty easy to find, just search for 01 00 00 80, if found, check offset 0x10 from there, there should be a 14 00 00 00 followed by a xx 00 00 00.

The types of faces, however, are much more complex than I expected.
*'''0x34''' Triangle, has vetex colors of all 3 vertices, a uv map and a list of 3 vertex indices.
*'''0x3c''' Quad, has vetex colors of all 4 vertices, a uv map and a list of 4 vertex indices.
*'''0x24''' Triangle, has only 1 vertex color value for all 3 vertices, a uv map and a list of 3 vertex indices.
*'''0x2c''' Quad, has only 1 vertex color value for all 4vertices, a uv map and a list of 4 vertex indices.
*'''0x20''' Triangle, has only 1 vertex color value (perhaps always zero and unused) , a list of 3 vertex indices, and a '00 00' at the end which makes me wonder whether it is another vertex, but it could be just a trick to make the total length a multiple of 4.
*'''0x28''' Quad, has only 1 vertex color value (perhaps always zero and unused) and a list of 4 vertex indices.
*'''0x30''' Triangle, similar to 0x20, but has 3 vertex colors.
*'''0x38''' Quad, similar to 0x28, but has 3 vertex colors.

------------------

Breaking the byte down into bits:

7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0
4: vertex color type
3: face type (triangle or quad)
2: texture type (textured or textureless)

[[Chrono Cross|Back to Chrono Cross Index]]
