[[Category:File format|T]]
== Games ==

The '''.TIM''' file format is the standard file format for images on Playstation. It is also used by many PC ports of Playstation games, like [[Resident Evil]], [[Resident Evil 2]], [[Resident Evil 3]], or [[Wipeout]].

== Structure ==

The values are stored in Little-Endian order.

== Header ==

A TIM file contains one uncompressed bitmap. It starts with this header:

<pre><nowiki>
typedef struct {
	unsigned long	magic;	/* Constant = 0x10 */
	unsigned long	type;
	unsigned long	offset; /* allways Size of Clut data + 12 */
	unsigned short	Palette Org X;
	unsigned short	Palette Org Y;
	unsigned short	palette_colors;
	unsigned short	nb_palettes;
} tim_header_t;
</nowiki></pre>

'type' can be: '0x08' for 4 bits paletted images, '0x09' for 8 bits paletted images, and '0x02' for 16 bits true-colour images.
'offset' is an offset to start of image data.
'nb_palettes' is the number of palettes stored in the file, each palette having 'palette_colors' colors.

== Palettes ==

In the case of paletted images, palettes are following the header in the file. Each color is coded in a 16-bits RGB value, which format is A1B5G5R5. There are 'palette_colors'*'nb_palettes' values stored.

== Image header ==

After the optionnal palettes, come the image header. The width is in 16bit words, it means the real width in pixel is width*4 for 4-bits paletted images, width*2 for 8-bits paletted images and width for 16-bits paletted images.

<pre><nowiki>
typedef struct {
	unsigned short	width;	/* Width of image in 16-bits words */
	unsigned short	height; /* Height of image in pixels */
} tim_size_t;
</nowiki></pre>

== Image data ==

=== 4 bits images ===

Each pixel is stored in 4 bits (so 2 pixels per byte), bits 7-4 for first pixel, and bits 3-0 for second pixel. The value is an index in a palette stored in the beginning of the file.

=== 8 bits images ===

Each pixel is stored in a byte, which is an index in a palette stored in the beginning of the file.

=== 16 bits images ===

Each pixel is in A1B5G5R5 format.

== External links for format description ==

* [http://wiki.qhimm.com/PSX/TIM_file Qhimm wiki]